title: Use Oplop to manage your web site passwords
---
This is a post I've been meaning to write for a while, but the [Gawker
breach][1] has brought the issue of web site password security into the
mainstream.

Managing passwords is burdensome. There are dozens of sites and services in
everyone's lives, and each has its own identity and password requirements.
Most of us are understandably frustrated at having to manage all of these just
to get things done, just to get access to the information we want or which is
ours to begin with. Which explains why we tend to use [easy-to-remember
passwords][2] which are, appropriately, easily guessed or cracked by
password-attacking software. Worse, we often resort to using the **same**
password on multiple sites (often still the too-easy password), which means a
breach at one site is typically a breach across a huge federation of sites
(hence, the [growing panic][3] over the Gawker intrusion). This is [not a new
problem][4], but it's getting larger all the time with every new site or
service we use.

The ability to log in to a site using your identity from a different site or
service -- your Facebookr or Twitter account, your OpenID -- helps with both
the user experience problem ("I am frustrated that I have to create an account
and password on every new site I visit") and the security problem ("My
password was hacked on Gawker and now they have access to my Amazon and bank
accounts"), but only to a degree. You still are vulnerable if your Facebook
password is weak, and obviously if your account is hacked, they have access to
all your linked-to sites and services. But while in general having so-called
"federated" identity services is a net win for web users, there are still many
sites that don't use them, and many who couldn't or shouldn't (i.e., you and
your bank probably both have an interest in working out your identity
together, not mediated through Facebook).

Since we still have to manage a bunch of passwords, it makes sense then that
there are many password management programs available to perform the role of
the digital wallet for your sensitive data. Programs like 1password, and
Password Gorilla, which maintain a central database of passwords, protected
with strong encryption and unlocked with a master password of your choosing.
For each new account you create, the program generates a new unique password
that looks like gobbledygook, and you plug it in to the site using
copy-and-paste -- you never have to remember the password for any particular
site, only your master password. Since the password is a random string of
characters, it's very hard to guess or be cracked by bad guys.

This central database file that password management programs use is somewhat
of an anachronism in the age of multiple Internet-connected devices -- if you
are out and about and need to log in to a web site from a friend's computer
but your central password database file is on your laptop at home, it's no
good.  So developers of these programs have moved to add some type of file
synchonization for the central database, deploying a service themselves or
using existing file sharing means. Since the database file is encrypted and
protected with a password, if it fell into someone else's hands, it should be
safe -- provided you used a strong password (there's that nasty problem
again). Until recently, I used Password Gorilla for my needs, syncing its
central database file with Dropbox so that I could retrieve passwords from any
of my computers. It still meant that I was stuck if I was say traveling and at
an internet cafe where I couldn't install Password Gorilla, let alone access
the central database file on Dropbox (to say nothing of worrying about leaving
traces of that file behind if I got as far as downloading it). The whole
notion of password management software with a central database file is
starting to feel impractical, imposing its own burdens.

I have over the past few months switched to using [Oplop][5] for my web site
password management needs. Oplop is just a web page. It does not look sexy
like 1password, it barely has any design at all. All it does is generate
obscure, hard-to-guess passwords, based on a nickname you provide (which
should correspond to the name or URL of the site or service you need a
password for), and a master password. You copy-and-paste the generated
password (or better yet, cut-and-paste, for maximum security against someone
standing over your shoulder), just like a password management program. The
difference is -- and this is a key difference -- there is no database, no
central file anywhere! In fact, there's nothing to install -- it's essentially
already install on any internet-connected device with a JavaScript-enabled
browser. Better yet, it works offline -- if you bookmark it, you can still
load the page and generate and retrieve passwords. Try it on your iPhone or
Android: [visit Oplop][5], bookmark it, close that browser page, put your
phone in "airplane" mode, and tap on the bookmark.

 [1]: http://news.google.com/?q=gawker+hack
 [2]: http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/technology/2010/12/gawker-hackers-expose-easy-to-guess-passwords-such-as-password-and-1234.html
 [3]: http://www.bnet.com/blog/technology-business/gawker-hacking-stirs-password-panic-at-linkedin-yahoo-and-others/7397
 [4]: http://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2006/12/realworld_passw.html
 [5]: https://oplop.appspot.com/
