title: Use Oplop for your web site passwords
slug: oplop
pub_date: 2010-12-18 01:52:52
---
<div style="float: right; margin-left: 1em; padding: 5px"><a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/slieschke/226873460/" title="Secure password of the week by Simon Lieschke, on Flickr"><img src="http://farm1.static.flickr.com/85/226873460_c8eabd2911_m.jpg" width="240" height="180" alt="Secure password of the week" /></a></div>

The [Gawker breach][gawker] made mainstream what’s been known for a
while: we don’t use good passwords, and we use the same password over
and over again on multiple sites, exposing us to a potential chain
reaction of account intrusions if it is uncovered.

One way to address this problem is to use a password generator—the
idea is that all you have to remember is a single, good, strong
password, and the password generator will spit out a random string of
characters to be used as a password on a particular site. This
generated password is hard for an attacker to guess, and hard for them
to “crack” with password-attacking software. You’re not supposed to
remember or even care what the actual password is: you just remember
the master password. And if one of the sites you have an account with
is compromised, it may suck for you with respect to your sensitive
information on that site, but because the generated password is unique
to the site, you’re safe from having it used against you on other
sites where you have accounts.

<img src="/images/oplop-screenshot.png" alt="Oplop screenshot"
style="float: left; margin-right: 1em; padding: 5px">

The password generator I use is called [Oplop][oplop]. It’s just a web
site, so you visit it in your browser; there’s nothing to
install. There are two fields to enter—a nickname, and the master
password. The nickname is any name you want to identify the site or
service for which you need a password. After you enter a nickname and
your master password, you click the “Create” button, and an
unguessable password is generated for you in the field below the
button. Enter that password into the site that’s asking you for a
password, and you’re all done. The next time you visit the site and
need to enter your password, you repeat the process exactly to get the
same unique password that’s just for that site.

There are a few tips and tricks to using Oplop successfully. The
nickname is just a label that you remember to refer to the site you
need a password for, but if it is different by even one character, an
entirely different password will be generated. So it’s important to be
consistent, and ideally use a simple convention so that you enter the
label the same way every time. I’ve chosen a convention of using
all-lowercase and no non-alphanumeric characters, and the domain name
of the site, minus the top-level domain (the .com or .org, etc.). For
example, if I’m on amazon.com, I’ll use “amazon” (without the quotes)
for the nickname. If I was visiting a site with the domain name
“Cat-Pics-123.net”, I’d use “catpics123” for the nickname. Whatever
your convention for nicknames, it should be simple and you should use
it consistently.

Your master password should be a good one—fairly long and hard to
guess—since it is the key to the kingdom. Security researchers often
praise the idea of “passphrase,” a sentence instead of a single
word. These can often be easier to remember and are just as strong if
not stronger than shorter, gobbledygook passwords, even if the
passphrase is composed of simple words. A four or five word sentence,
separated with spaces, should suffice, although longer passphrases are
even better. In any case, use care when entering your master password
into Oplop. By default, it doesn’t do any checking, so, like in the
case of the nickname, a single character’s difference means a whole
different generated password. You can optionally click on the checkbox
“Validate master password?”, which adds an additional password field
for you to re-enter your master password, providing a simple check
that might catch a typo in the first field.

The final tip is to cut-and-paste the generated password out of its
field instead of copy-and-paste. It’s not so much a tip per se because
Oplop recommends that you do this right on the page, but it’s
important enough to reiterate. Doing it this way prevents someone from
snooping over your shoulder, or if you are careless and leave the
Oplop page open untentionally on a shared computer.

You might have stopped short at the notion of a web-based password
generator. Isn’t it insecure to trust a web site to generate a
password for you? The answer is, you are only actually interacting
with your browser—there is no network activity taking place when you
generate a password with Oplop. That is because the entire Oplop
program is just HTML and JavaScript loaded in your browser, and it is
your browser on your local computer that takes the nickname and master
password, performs the cryptographic magic on them, and outputs the
generated password. In fact, Oplop works offline just as well. You can
test it by visiting the site and bookmarking it on your iPhone or
Android, deleting the browser window, putting the phone in airplane
mode, then loading Oplop from the bookmark. It works just the same as
if you were connected to the internet.

The browser-centric nature of Oplop gets to another key concept about
it—there’s nothing to install. In fact, it is essentially already
installed on any internet-enabled device with a JavaScript-enabled
browser. There’s no central database of account names and generated
passwords, like you might expect, and which password generators like
1Password and Password Gorilla are built around. These programs work
similarly to Oplop in the end result, but their central database
presents a user experience problem—it needs to be shared among the
computers you want to use the program on. This can make it difficult
to retrieve a password if you are on your friend’s laptop or a PC at
an internet café. Not only do you have to install the password
generator software itself, if you are allowed to by policy of the
computer’s owner or manager, you have to synchronize the central
database with the computer. By simply eschewing the notion of storing
account names and passwords, Oplop provides a universally-accessible
password management tool. Those unique generated passwords are just
ephemera, the results of combining the secret you keep in your head
(your master password), the site nicknames, and a cryptographic
function in your computer. Even the notion of the “master password” is
turned on its head—it’s not unlocking some database of passwords, it’s
[combined with the nickname to make a cryptographic hash][how], the
bits of which make up the final generated password. You could start
using a different master password at any time, which essentially would
invalidate any extant passwords generated with the old one (you still
would have to manually go in and update each password on each site,
though).

There are other approaches to securing your passwords, including
[writing them down][writedown]. In fact, if you have trouble
remembering strong passwords or passphrases of sufficient length, you
might consider writing down your Oplop master password on a slip of
paper you keep in your wallet.

Oplop is not perfect—it outputs a fixed style of generated passwords
that may not meet the password criteria for various sites and
services, which require certain lengths, or a certain mix of
characters. It also doesn't address the need of strong,
crypotgraphically-secure storage of ad-hoc information such as credit
card numbers and other sensitive account information, which are often
stored alongside passwords and account names in more traditional
central database-style password generator programs. But this is by
design and not a failing of Oplop. I continue to use Password Gorilla
for this scenario, especially for protecting financial
information. Also, there are certain [threats Oplop can’t protect
against][threats], And it’s worth understanding what they are before
you start using it.

Oplop addresses the proliferation of passwords across multiple web
site accounts, is simple to use, and works everywhere there’s a
browser. So stop using “letmein” for all your web site accounts—you’d
be much better off plugging that in to Oplop as your master
password. But don’t. Use a better one.

 [gawker]: http://news.google.com/?q=gawker+breach
 [oplop]: https://oplop.appspot.com/
 [writedown]: http://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2005/06/write_down_your.html
 [how]: http://code.google.com/p/oplop/wiki/HowItWorks
 [threats]: http://code.google.com/p/oplop/wiki/ThreatModel
