title: More Redis internals: Tracing a GET & SET
slug: redis_get_set
pub_date: 2011-03-10 15:48
---
In my [previous article](/articles/redis-under-the-hood.html), I took a
superficial look at how Redis starts up and prepares itself to process
commands. In this article, I'll follow a `GET` and a `SET` command as
they move from client through the server and back. The `GET` will be for
a key that doesn't exist, and the `SET` will set that key.  Then I'll look
quickly at a subsequent `GET` and how it differs.

As before, I'm exploring Redis with the source code open in my editor and
indexed with a `tags` file, and the Redis server running under `gdb` in
another terminal.

Caveat: this article was written against the codebase of Redis 2.2.1. With
respect to my previous article, for a list of what has changed in Redis since
I wrote it, see this [comment on
HN](http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=2301804).

**Edit:** I made two minor changes based on feedback—Redis keys are not Redis
objects, they are `sds` strings; and you don’t have to hack the Makefile to
compile without optimizations.

GET
===

Let's execute the command `get users:1234` on Redis.

Preparing
---------

If you inspect certain variables under `gdb`, you might not get what you want.
Instead you see a message like "<value temporarily unavailable, due to
optimizations>." This is because the compiler has optimized the machine code
in such a fashion that the portion of memory you wanted to look at that was
never used, at least for the variable under inspection. To make stepping
through the code and inspecting a little easier, we make sure that Redis is
not compiled with optimizations. You can do this by either building Redis with
the following invocation:

    make noopt

or by setting an environment variable:

    OPTIMIZATION= make

Sending the command from the client
-----------------------------------

If we look at the `repl` loop of redis-cli, we see that it uses the
`linenoise` library to split the arguments of the command. It dispatches on
the first argument. The loop checks for client commands that aren't processed
as a command by the Redis server, like `exit`/`quit`, `clear` (to clear the screen),
and `connect` (which is a way to connect to a specified Redis server on host
port, instead of the default host of 127.0.0.1 and port of 6379.

Any other argument is considered the name of a command to send to the server.
The remaining arguments are the arugments for that command.

We're trying to get the on-the-wire representation of the `get users:1234` command.
redis-cli uses a `redisContext` struct to encapsulate the state of the
connection to the server, as well as the output buffer where the command in
the form of the Redis protocol is written for sending to the server. We know
from reading the source of hiredis (the Redis C client library that the redis-cli
program is built on) that the `obuf` field is where the raw command is stored:

    :::c
    # hiredis.h:107
    /* Context for a connection to Redis */
    typedef struct redisContext {
        int fd;
        int flags;
        char *obuf; /* Write buffer */
        int err; /* Error flags, 0 when there is no error */
        char *errstr; /* String representation of error when applicable */

        /* Function set for reply buildup and reply reader */
        redisReplyObjectFunctions *fn;
        void *reader;
    } redisContext;

If we set a breakpoint on `cliReadReply`, we can inspect the output buffer and
see exactly how the command looks as a bytestring bound for the server.

    :::text
    client $ gdb src/redis-cli
    (gdb) b cliReadReply
    (gdb) run
    Starting program: /home/paul/src/redis-2.2.0-RC2/src/redis-cli 
    Reading symbols for shared libraries +. done
    redis> get users:1234

    Breakpoint 1, cliReadReply (output_raw_strings=0) at redis-cli.c:421
    421         if (redisGetReply(context,&_reply) != REDIS_OK) {
    (gdb) p context->obuf 
    $1 = 0x100102428 "*2\r\n$3\r\nget\r\n$10\r\nusers:1234\r\n"

We see that the Redis command `get users:1234` as entered in our client is
translated to `*2\r\n$3\r\nget\r\n$10\r\nusers:1234\r\n`. Any Redis client is
going to convert our command expressed in its respective syntax to the same
on-the-wire format. So in Python:

    :::text
    >>> redis_client.get('users:1234')

will send the same `*2\r\n$3\r\nget\r\n$10\r\nusers:1234\r\n` bytestring to
the server. 

Let's print that bytestring to screen and render those `\r\n's as line feeds
so we can see an expanded view and get a better look at the protocol.

    :::text
    *2
    $3
    get
    $10
    users:1234

The first bit is `*2`, which tells us that the arity of the command,
including the command name, is 2. That is, the server should expect two
arguments to follow.

The next bit is `$3`, which means that the length of the first argument in
bytes is 3. The argument itself follows, our command name, `get`.

The next bit after that is `$10`, so the length in bytes of the second
argument is 10. Our one and only argument to the command is next,
`users:1234`, the key we are trying to `get`.

Receiving the command on the server
-----------------------------------

If you remember from the last article, `readQueryFromClient` is a good place
to set a breakpoint in your debugger on the server side for inspecting an
inbound client command.

    :::text
    server $ gdb src/redis-server
    (gdb) b readQueryFromClient
    Breakpoint 1 at 0x100011445: file networking.c, line 882.
    (gdb) run redis.conf
    Starting program: /home/paul/src/redis-2.2.0-RC2/src/redis-server redis.conf
    Reading symbols for shared libraries +. done
    [63700] 01 Mar 11:04:40 * Server started, Redis version 2.2.1
    [63700] 01 Mar 11:04:40 * The server is now ready to accept connections on port 6379

Now back in the terminal with the client running in the debugger, continue to
send the command to the server, which will stop at the breakpoint we set.

    :::text
    # client
    (gdb) c
    Continuing.

    # server
    Breakpoint 1, readQueryFromClient (el=0x100200000, fd=5, privdata=0x100804e00, mask=1) at networking.c:801
    801     void readQueryFromClient(aeEventLoop *el, int fd, void *privdata, int mask) {

Let's step to the following line:

    :::c
    # src/networking.c:808
    nread = read(fd, buf, REDIS_IOBUF_LEN);

If we step to here in our debugger, we see that the server read 30 bytes. If
you count the number of bytes in our Redis protocol-encoded command,
`*2\r\n$3\r\nget\r\n$10\r\nusers:1234\r\n`, you'll see it's 30. Just for good
measure, let's look at the 30 bytes beginning at the memory location pointed
to by `buf`:

    :::text
    (gdb) p nread
    30
    (gdb) x/30cb buf
    0x7fff5fbfeaf0: 42 '*'  50 '2'  13 '\r' 10 '\n' 36 '$'  51 '3'  13 '\r' 10 '\n'
    0x7fff5fbfeaf8: 71 'G'  69 'E'  84 'T'  13 '\r' 10 '\n' 36 '$'  49 '1'  48 '0'
    0x7fff5fbfeb00: 13 '\r' 10 '\n' 117 'u' 115 's' 101 'e' 114 'r' 115 's' 58 ':'
    0x7fff5fbfeb08: 49 '1'  50 '2'  51 '3'  52 '4'  13 '\r' 10 '\n'
    
And we can see our whole command bytestring is there, byte by byte.

The server has now read in the entirety of our command in one step.  (Because
we had a relatively short command, one that fits inside a kernel buffer, and
we are the only client on a loopback network device, this is the case, but it
need not be. Since Redis is event-driven, this function,
`readQueryFromClient`, is called whenever there are bytes from buffers to be
read. If our command was particularly long, or there was a lot of network
contention, the command may take more than one I/O event before it is fully
read. For this reason, Redis builds up a buffer per client and appends bytes
to it on each call to this function. It only proceeds with processing the
command when it has been fully read. But we don't need to consider this in our
simple example, so we will proceed.)

We're going to elide the processing of the input buffer. This is the point
where the server takes the Redis protocol-encoded bytestring of our request
and unpacks it into arguments on the client struct object. If you are
interested in the details of that parsing, examine the function
`processMultibulkBuffer` in `networking.c`. All we are interested in at this
point is that the `argc` member of the client object is the number of command
arguments (counting the command name itself) and `argv` is a pointer to the
list of arguments.

The bit of code we care at this point is `processCommand`. The first thing the
server does is look up the command in its command table (see "Setting up
command table" in the previous article, but note that this lookup is now O(1),
see the HN thread linked above). Assuming the command is found (which our
`get` will be), the server will double-check that the arity of the command as
defined in the command table matches the number of arguments received from the
client (`c->argc`).

    :::c
    # redis.c:998
    cmd = lookupCommand(c->argv[0]->ptr);
    if (!cmd) {
        addReplyErrorFormat(c,"unknown command '%s'",
            (char*)c->argv[0]->ptr);
        return REDIS_OK;
    } else if ((cmd->arity > 0 && cmd->arity != c->argc) ||
               (c->argc < -cmd->arity)) {
        addReplyErrorFormat(c,"wrong number of arguments for '%s' command",
            cmd->name);
        return REDIS_OK;
    }

Skip down to the end of `processCommand`. Because our humble `get` is not a
"multi" command like `mget`, `mset`, etc., it doesn't require queue-like
processing of the underlying multiple commands, so we go right to `call`,
which is where our command is dispatched.

    :::c
    # redis.c:953
    void call(redisClient *c, struct redisCommand *cmd) {
        long long dirty;

        dirty = server.dirty;
        cmd->proc(c);
        dirty = server.dirty-dirty;

        if (server.appendonly && dirty)
            feedAppendOnlyFile(cmd,c->db->id,c->argv,c->argc);
        if ((dirty || cmd->flags & REDIS_CMD_FORCE_REPLICATION) &&
            listLength(server.slaves))
            replicationFeedSlaves(server.slaves,c->db->id,c->argv,c->argc);
        if (listLength(server.monitors))
            replicationFeedMonitors(server.monitors,c->db->id,c->argv,c->argc);
        server.stat_numcommands++;
    }

Let's focus on line 952, `cmd->proc(c);`. This is Redis's dynamic dispatching
of command function calling. Redis makes this clean and simple by
encapsulating commands and giving all the actual underlying command functions
the same function signature, taking our client object, which carries the
payload of our command's arguments. So we're interested in looking into the
details of the Redis command object and the actual function that will handle
our `get`.

    :::c
    # redis.h:504
    struct redisCommand {
        char *name;
        redisCommandProc *proc;
        int arity;
        int flags;
        /* Use a function to determine which keys need to be loaded
         * in the background prior to executing this command. Takes precedence
         * over vm_firstkey and others, ignored when NULL */
        redisVmPreloadProc *vm_preload_proc;
        /* What keys should be loaded in background when calling this command? */
        int vm_firstkey; /* The first argument that's a key (0 = no keys) */
        int vm_lastkey;  /* THe last argument that's a key */
        int vm_keystep;  /* The step between first and last key */
    };

If we pop up to the top of `redis.c`, we see the definition of the Redis command
table, and our `get` is the first entry.

    :::c
    # redis.c:71
    struct redisCommand readonlyCommandTable[] = {
        {"get",getCommand,2,0,NULL,1,1,1},

`getCommand` is the function that does the actual work for our command.
It's a thin wrapper for `getGenericCommand`.

    :::c
    # t_string.c:62
    int getGenericCommand(redisClient *c) {
        robj *o;

        if ((o = lookupKeyReadOrReply(c,c->argv[1],shared.nullbulk)) == NULL)
            return REDIS_OK;

        if (o->type != REDIS_STRING) {
            addReply(c,shared.wrongtypeerr);
            return REDIS_ERR;
        } else {
            addReplyBulk(c,o);
            return REDIS_OK;
        }
    }

    void getCommand(redisClient *c) {
        getGenericCommand(c);
    }

The arguments to `lookupKeyReadOrReply` are the client object, the key
`users:1234` we're trying to look up, and an object, `shared.nullbulk` that
will be the default reply to the client if the key is not found.

    :::c
    # db.c:58
    robj *lookupKeyReadOrReply(redisClient *c, robj *key, robj *reply) {
        robj *o = lookupKeyRead(c->db, key);
        if (!o) addReply(c,reply);
        return o;
    }

`lookupKeyRead` is a thin wrapper for `lookupKey` that handles removing keys
that have been set to expire.

Now we get to the heart of the `get` command -- looking up the key in the
database.

    :::c
    # db.c:9
    robj *lookupKey(redisDb *db, robj *key) {
        dictEntry *de = dictFind(db->dict,key->ptr);
        if (de) {
            robj *val = dictGetEntryVal(de);

            /* Update the access time for the aging algorithm.
             * Don't do it if we have a saving child, as this will trigger
             * a copy on write madness. */
            if (server.bgsavechildpid == -1 && server.bgrewritechildpid == -1)
                val->lru = server.lruclock;

            if (server.vm_enabled) {
                if (val->storage == REDIS_VM_MEMORY ||
                    val->storage == REDIS_VM_SWAPPING)
                {
                    /* If we were swapping the object out, cancel the operation */
                    if (val->storage == REDIS_VM_SWAPPING)
                        vmCancelThreadedIOJob(val);
                } else {
                    int notify = (val->storage == REDIS_VM_LOADING);

                    /* Our value was swapped on disk. Bring it at home. */
                    redisAssert(val->type == REDIS_VMPOINTER);
                    val = vmLoadObject(val);
                    dictGetEntryVal(de) = val;

                    /* Clients blocked by the VM subsystem may be waiting for
                     * this key... */
                    if (notify) handleClientsBlockedOnSwappedKey(db,key);
                }
            }
            server.stat_keyspace_hits++;
            return val;
        } else {
            server.stat_keyspace_misses++;
            return NULL;
        }
    }

Redis uses its own hash table implementation to store keys and their values in
memory. Inside the `db` object, the field `dict` is a pointer to the hash
value for the current Redis database (remember there can be up to 16 separate
databases in a single Redis server instance, indexed by number).

First, Redis calls `dictFind` with the database's hash table and a pointer
to the key's bytestring. `dictFind` looks up the hash of the key in the
table, using a standard algorithm that should be familiar to anyone who's
implemented a hash table (check out `dict.c` starting at line 391 if you're
interested, the table is an array with linked lists for colliding hashes).

If the key is found in the table, `dictFind` returns a pointer to the entry in
the table. Otherwise, it returns `NULL`. Back in `lookupKey`, if the entry is
not null, Redis retrieves the value (i.e., the Redis object our key
references) from the hash table via `dictGetEntryVal` and takes care of a bit
of bookkeeping for expiry and VM, if the key was found, and stats in either
case (hits and misses). If the entry was `NULL`, then `lookupKey` also returns
`NULL`; we'll see how this is handled by Redis for a reply to the client when
the key is not found, which is the case for us at this stage.

With the value of `lookupKey`, we'll go back up the stack to our callers. Back
to `lookupKeyReadOrReply`, we look at line 60:

    :::c
    # t_string.c:60
            if (!o) addReply(c,reply);

Since we got `NULL` from `lookupKey` this time, we call `addReply`.  The value
of `reply` here comes from the call in `getGenericCommand`, and it is
`shared.nullbulk`. This field in the global struct object `shared` is
initialize thusly:

    :::c
    # redis.c:712
    shared.nullbulk = createObject(REDIS_STRING,sdsnew("$-1\r\n"));

We can see that it is a Redis string object who's on-the-wire value is
`$-1\r\n`, meaning a length of -1, Redis's way of indicating null to a
client, according to the protocol.

`addReply` builds the reply to the client. It does this by first setting up a
write event on the main event loop listener with `_installWriteEvent`. This
makes sure that the reply is written out to the client connection when there
are bytes present in the buffer. Next, Redis adds the reply to the client's
buffer. If the reply object were an non-string value like an integer, or a
list, or a set, Redis would first decode it to a bytestring that can be
serialized to, for example, on a socket. Redis string objects are encoded
"raw," or as-is. The `nullbulk` object is technically a string object, so no
decoding is necessary in our case. In any case, the reply bytestring is copied
to the client's reply buffer with `_addReplyToBuffer`, which for all intents
and purposes completes the execution of our `get` command on the server.

The client will read the on-the-wire reply of `$-1\r\n` and know that it is a
string reply of length -1, and therefore is the null (or "nil," in the context
of `redis-cli`) object, and to convert that into the appropriate object for
the language of the client. Back to our `redis-cli` client patiently waiting
for a reply from our breakpointed server, which we continue from, that looks
like:

    :::text
    (nil)
    redis>

SET
===

The `set` command proceeds much the same way as the `get`, up to the point of
command dispatching on the server.

    :::text
    # client
    redis> set users:1234 "Paul Smith"

    # server
    Breakpoint 1, readQueryFromClient (el=0x100400000, fd=6, privdata=0x100805e00, mask=1) at networking.c:801
    801     void readQueryFromClient(aeEventLoop *el, int fd, void *privdata, int mask) {
    (gdb) n
    802         redisClient *c = (redisClient*) privdata;
    (gdb) n
    808         nread = read(fd, buf, REDIS_IOBUF_LEN);
    (gdb) n
    809         if (nread == -1) {
    (gdb) print nread
    $1 = 47
    (gdb) x/47cb buf
    0x7fff5fbfeba0: 42 '*'  51 '3'  13 '\r' 10 '\n' 36 '$'  51 '3'  13 '\r' 10 '\n'
    0x7fff5fbfeba8: 115 's' 101 'e' 116 't' 13 '\r' 10 '\n' 36 '$'  49 '1'  48 '0'
    0x7fff5fbfebb0: 13 '\r' 10 '\n' 117 'u' 115 's' 101 'e' 114 'r' 115 's' 58 ':'
    0x7fff5fbfebb8: 49 '1'  50 '2'  51 '3'  52 '4'  13 '\r' 10 '\n' 36 '$'  49 '1'
    0x7fff5fbfebc0: 48 '0'  13 '\r' 10 '\n' 80 'P'  97 'a'  117 'u' 108 'l' 32 ' '
    0x7fff5fbfebc8: 83 'S'  109 'm' 105 'i' 116 't' 104 'h' 13 '\r' 10 '\n'
    (gdb) print (char *)buf
    $2 = 0x7fff5fbfeba0 "*3\r\n$3\r\nset\r\n$10\r\nusers:1234\r\n$10\r\nPaul Smith\r\n"

This time, our protocol-encoded bytestring is 47 bytes long, owing to the
extra argument "Paul Smith" and the length tag it requires. Also notice the
leading `*3` indicates there are three arguments: `set`, `users:1234`, `Paul Smith`.

Let's skip ahead now to the point in `call` in `redis.c`, after the command has
been looked-up in the command table and the server is about ready to call the
underlying `proc` function with the client object argument. The `set` command,
in the form of a `redisCommand` struct, looks like this:

    :::c
    # redis.c:73
    {"set",setCommand,3,REDIS_CMD_DENYOOM,NULL,0,0,0},

Notice that the arity of the command is 3, which includes the leading command
name, plus key and value, and matches what we expect from the client. The
`set` command has a flag that `get` did not: the constant `REDIS_CMD_DENYOOM`
means that, in out-of-memory situations where Redis can't allocate any more
memory, the execution of the command should be denied. (The absence of this
flag means that Redis can continue to serve client "read" requests like `get`
even when the server can no longer write any new data.)

I set a breakpoint on `setCommand` and let the server continue running until
that point:

    :::text
    # server
    (gdb) b setCommand
    Breakpoint 2 at 0x10001a6e2: file t_string.c, line 48.
    (gdb) c
    Continuing.
    Breakpoint 2, setCommand (c=0x100805e00) at t_string.c:48
    48          c->argv[2] = tryObjectEncoding(c->argv[2]);

Incidentally, you can inspect the values of the client's command arguments at
any time, with a simple `gdb` invocation. The arguments are of type `robj`,
which has a field `ptr` that is a pointer to the actual value in memory. Since
in our `set` case these are strings, we can inspect them by typecasting to
`char *` like so:

    :::text
    (gdb) p (char *)c->argv[0]->ptr
    $10 = 0x10032ae78 "set"
    (gdb) p (char *)c->argv[1]->ptr
    $11 = 0x10032b068 "users:1234"
    (gdb) p (char *)c->argv[2]->ptr
    $12 = 0x10032b098 "Paul Smith"
    
The first thing the server does in `setCommand` is encode the value being set
with `tryObjectEncoding`. It will try to create an efficient encoding if the
bytestring can be interpreted as an integer, for example. This can save space
especially in the case where many numbers are being stored.  Additionally,
Redis will try to reuse shared integers as values instead of allocating
resources for new ones -- see the previous article for more on the creation
and use of shared integers.

Once the value being set has been encoded, `setGenericCommand` is called
(`set` shares `setGenericCommand` with the `setnx` and `setex` commands). From
here, `dbAdd` is called, with the client, key, and value as arguments. `dbAdd`
will only add the value to the database's hash table if the key does not
already exist. In our case, since the key `users:1234` does not exist, the
value of `dictFind` is null, and the function proceeds to add the value with
`dictAdd`.

`dictAdd` takes the dictionary hash table, key, and value as arguments. It
uses `_dictKeyIndex` to find the index of a free slot in the hash table for
our new entry. See the implementation in `dict.c` and `dict.h` for the details
of key hashing, and the structure of the dictionary and its component hash
tables (each Redis dictionary contains two hash tables in order to provide
incremental rehashing as the dictionary grows). `dictAdd` allocates memory for
the new entry and stores it in the new index.

The server returns back up the stack from `dictAdd` and `dbAdd` to
`setGenericCommand`, where it increments the reference count on our new value.
Redis uses reference counting in order to free memory used by values that have
been deleted or have expired. It then "touches" the key so that if any clients
are `watch`ing the key, the next `exec` command will fail. It also increments
the server's `dirty` flag, which it uses to determine when to write out the
dump file to disk. Finally, it writes out the reply to the client, which is a
shared object, `shared.ok`. This is special Redis string object in the
protocol that consists of the bytestring "+OK\r\n". Clients will typically
convert this into the equivalent "true" value for their language.

GET redux
=========

Our key is now set, so we can try the `get users:1234` command again and see
how it differs for a found key.

    :::c
    # db.c:9
    robj *lookupKey(redisDb *db, robj *key) {
        dictEntry *de = dictFind(db->dict,key->ptr);
        if (de) {
            robj *val = dictGetEntryVal(de);

            // ... skipping the lru & vm parts ... 

            server.stat_keyspace_hits++;
            return val;

The point where a `get` on an existing key and a `get` on a non-existent key
differ is line 11, where the `de` entry in the database's dictionary is found.
`dictGetEntryVal` is a simple macro for accessing the field in the `de` struct
that carries the value associated with the key. Redis updates its statistics
to indicate a key hit and returns the value object.

Again, as with the key miss from above (remember the null value is a Redis
object, too), the value is decoded into the Redis bytestring protocol. This is
the response to the client, and we have concluded our `GET`/`SET`/`GET` dance.
